---
layout: post
tag: Posts
comments: true
title: RARBG is dead
---

# RARBG is dead

Author: lamescholar - 2023-09-22
<br><br>

One of the richest libraries of films was shut down by administrators. Website link <https://rarbgmirror.org/torrents.php> shows the following message.
<br><br>

Hello guys,<br>
We would like to inform you that we have decided to shut down our site.<br>
The past 2 years have been very difficult for us - some of the people in our team died due to covid complications,<br>
others still suffer the side effects of it - not being able to work at all.<br>
Some are also fighting the war in Europe - ON BOTH SIDES.<br>
Also, the power price increase in data centers in Europe hit us pretty hard.<br>
Inflation makes our daily expenses impossible to bare.<br>
Therefore we can no longer run this site without massive expenses that we can no longer cover out of pocket.<br>
After an unanimous vote we've decided that we can no longer do it.<br>
We are sorry :(<br>
Bye
<br><br>

This tragic story reminds us what stands behind covid mortality statistics, hardening of living conditions and war all happening in recent years. It's hundreds of thousands of similar tragedies, most of which stay personal tragedies. These thoughts reminded me about a recently published book that treats this ongoing avalanche of disasters. [Callinicos, Alex - The New Age of Catastrophe - 2023](https://disk.yandex.ru/i/YSw9q2h-q7dQag).

One of the reviews on Amazon:

"Covid. Economic immiseration. War. We are living in a time of perpetual crisis. Crisis is inherent to capitalism, and as Alex Callinicos compellingly argues in his new book, to avert catastrophe, we must confront capitalism."

Paul A. Passavant, Hobart and William Smith Colleges

